Eric Adams wasted little time following up on his campaign promise to be a champion for all things plant-based. Just a month after taking the oath as New York City’s mayor, he announced that the city’s public schools — the largest school system in the nation — would set aside one day each week to serve only vegan meals.

The reviews for Vegan Fridays, which began in February, were mixed. On Twitter, while some applauded the effort, many others shared photos of the unappetizing and decidedly not-vegan meals that had been served to their children.

But the criticism has not deterred the mayor, a self-proclaimed vegan, from announcing a sweeping package of other policy goals and initiatives aimed at improving nutrition for New Yorkers.

The more substantial measures include revising standards for all food purchased and served by city agencies by April 1, and expanding plant-based meals in city-run institutions like jails and shelters. Mr. Adams has proposed improving nutrition in food-insecure neighborhoods by offering financial incentives for grocery stores to stock healthy foods. He also says the city will match dollars that New Yorkers spend on fruits and vegetables through the federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (what used to be known as food stamps).

Other ideas remain somewhat vague, like a general call for more urban agriculture, including hydroponics and rooftop farms. Mr. Adams has said he would consider reviving an effort to tax sales of sugary sodas.

Food issues have been a rallying cry for many urban leaders in recent decades, and New York mayors have been no exception. Ed Koch banned food vendors from parts of the city in 1985 (then quickly changed his mind). In 2017, Bill de Blasio required chain restaurants to post calorie counts on menus.

But not since Michael Bloomberg — who barred restaurants from using most trans fats in 2006, and for several years tried unsuccessfully to impose a soda tax — has a New York mayor focused so intently on food and nutrition.

Mr. Adams has also made himself the face of these food policies, expounding at length on his struggle with Type 2 diabetes, and how adopting a plant-based diet rescued his health. Even as he grapples with a welter of crises, from Covid to violence against subway riders, he continually asserts that food is central to solving many of them.

“There is a level of connectivity with food policies that we have often ignored,” Mr. Adams said in a recent interview, adding that plant-based eating can help combat everything from climate change to Covid to mental health problems. “There is no better way to strengthen your immune system than the right food.”

The reach and ambition of his ideas have drawn praise from many of the people who have worked for years to promote better nutrition for New Yorkers.

“The mayor’s newer policies leverage the buying power of city agencies to create systemic change,” said Angela Davis, the director of food access and agriculture for GrowNYC, an environmental nonprofit.

Others are frustrated that Mr. Adams hasn’t provided more specifics about how he’ll finance and execute many of his proposals. “The lack of details that have been shared is concerning,” said State Senator Jessica Ramos, a fellow Democrat who has made food issues central to her work.

A spokesman for the mayor said that it was still early in his term, and that more specifics would be coming. But Ms. Ramos said the introduction of Vegan Fridays didn’t bode well for his larger agenda.

“The rollout was really about pretty pictures and less about nutritionists really outlining what the dietary goals for our children are,” she said. “As a mom, that is what I would have appreciated.”

“I would love for the conversation to actually be much more about where the food is sourced from,” she added. “A lot of these vegan lunches that we saw were these burritos that come in a plastic wrap and are clearly processed.”

The initiative could be an opportunity to support New York State farmers, Ms. Ramos said. School districts that buy at least 30 percent of their food from in-state producers receive bigger reimbursements from the state; New York City, she said, could learn from Buffalo, where the school district was able to meet that standard within a year of its announcement in 2018. A spokeswoman for the state agriculture department said New York City schools had not applied for reimbursement through the program; the city’s education department declined to say whether its schools met the 30 percent standard.

Mr. Adams said Vegan Fridays were still a work in progress, and he wanted to make improvements before deciding whether to add more days. “This is the beginning of a conversation,” he said. “We are going to sit down and say, ‘Hey we did a month of this, let’s come together and figure out, how do we do it right?’”

Some food activists say the city missed a chance to sell the public on a good idea.

“I think earlier, more proactive communication would have been helpful to explain a big change,” said Liz Accles, the executive director of Community Food Advocates, an organization addressing poverty and hunger in New York. “So many families rely on the food, and if parents and children and school communities aren’t clear about what it is,” she added, “people can go to the worst place.”

It may be harder for food-service directors for school districts to offer vegan meals when they have grown accustomed to the subsidized food they receive through the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Foods in Schools program, which includes meat and dairy, said Amie Hamlin, the executive director for the Coalition for Healthy School Food, an organization that promotes plant-based meals.

While vegan foods are available through the Foods in Schools program, “schools go for the foods that would cost the most on the open market,” Ms. Hamlin said (though a recent Agriculture Department report shows that applesauce, strawberries and canned peaches are the most requested items for the 2022-23 school year for New York City and Long Island). The federal government requires cafeterias to offer milk as part of its National School Lunch and Breakfast program.

Milk has emerged as a new battleground. When Mr. Adams recently signaled that he would consider a ban on chocolate milk in schools because of its high sugar content, he was assailed by dairy farmers and members of the state’s congressional delegation who contend that flavored milk is an important source of nutrients for many schoolchildren.

The mayor’s next big food initiative will be to work with the city’s Department of Health and Mental Hygiene to update standards for the types of foods city agencies can purchase and serve. The new standards will modify the requirements for nutrients, including limits on sodium and sugar, to reflect the most recent scientific research.

Dr. Peter Lurie, the president of the Center for Science in the Public Interest, said that given the magnitude of the city government’s purchasing power — it spends $500 million a year — updating these guidelines can help support independent food producers, and send a strong public message.

“It is clear the city has an outsize impact upon nutritional policy in general in this country,” he said, as local policies like New York’s ban on trans fats were eventually adopted by the Obama administration. “That Mayor Adams would want to seize that pulpit is encouraging because it is likely that his voice will be heard.”

Even with that pulpit, though, Mr. Adams’s goal of expanding healthy food options in neighborhoods that have historically lacked access may prove much more challenging, Dr. Lurie said.

Those neighborhoods face deep systemic inequities that also have to be addressed, he said. For example, the city’s history of redlining makes it less likely that predominantly Black neighborhoods will have grocery stores where healthy food can be sold at all, he said.

Dr. Lurie suggested the mayor look at policies other local governments have adopted, like the requirement by Prince George’s County in Maryland that children’s meals at restaurants meet certain health standards.

But New York City’s size and density may make it much harder to set and enforce such policies. That challenge extends to Mr. Adams’s goal of promoting more urban agriculture, said Ms. Accles, who runs Community Food Advocates.

“In New York, there is such a huge demand” for food, she said, “and limited space to grow things.”

In December, Mr. Adams named a food-policy transition team of restaurateurs, academics and others that met throughout the month to make recommendations for his administration. His efforts will be overseen by Kate MacKenzie, the director of the mayor’s office of food policy, who was appointed in 2019 by Mr. de Blasio. The office was established under Mr. Bloomberg in 2008.

Last month, Mr. Adams announced that imagery on all food-related promotional material released by city agencies or advertised on city property would feature only healthy food. He has expanded a hospital program he started as Brooklyn borough president in 2019 to offer clinics for patients on topics like diet and sleep habits.

Mr. Adams said he would also consider revisiting Mr. Bloomberg’s proposal for a soda tax. (A City Hall spokesman declined to elaborate but said, “The mayor is leaving all options on the table to promote healthier diets and reduce the consumption of unhealthy foods such as processed meats and sugary drinks.”)

Mr. Bloomberg drew widespread criticism when he called for the soda tax — not just from the beverage industry, but also from New Yorkers who saw the move as a classist infringement on personal choice.

Mr. Adams may be even more vulnerable to this criticism because he has centered the discourse on himself and his own diet, said Dr. Lurie of the Center for Science in the Public Interest. And that may distract people from the substance of the mayor’s policies.

In February, Mr. Adams touched off a media frenzy when he ordered fish at a restaurant after proclaiming that he was vegan. (He responded by saying he was “imperfect.”)

It didn’t surprise Dr. Lurie that “Fishgate,” as some have called the incident, got so much attention.

“When you put the spotlight on yourself in those ways, you bring a lot of scrutiny on your own personal habits,” he said. “There is a solid scientific basis for a lot of what he is suggesting, and personally I think in the long term that’s a more sustainable argument.”

Robert Osborne grew anxious about dinner when his Brooklyn co-op board put the kibosh on a plan to move a gas line for his kitchen renovation. How could Mr. Osborne, a math teacher, cook his favorite dishes like skillet chicken with caramelized mushrooms and onions if he couldn’t do it over the classic blue-orange blaze of a gas stove?

Like many of the more than 40 million home cooks in the United States with gas stoves, Mr. Osborne considered his to be essential, a nonnegotiable part of his kitchen that, had it not been for the co-op board, he would have kept.

After all, cooking over the open fire of a gas stove sparks something primal and intuitive in our lizard brains. Watching flames leap over the sides of a pan and lick the bone of a sizzling lamb chop is visceral and sensual, two adjectives you might not associate with the sleek ceramic surface of the Samsung induction range Mr. Osborne ended up installing instead.

But for all the sexiness of cooking with gas (a concept bolstered by aggressive lobbying and advertising from the natural gas industry), it has been shown to be catastrophic for the environment, emitting potent greenhouse gases like methane into the atmosphere. Worse, a recent study demonstrated that 75 percent of these emissions occur when the stove is off.

The noxious fumes that get trapped in our homes are also harmful, especially for children.

Brady Seals, a manager at RMI, a nonprofit focused on sustainability, and an author of a study examining the health effects of gas stoves, said indoor nitrogen dioxide levels can spike quickly, reaching hazardous levels in the amount of time it takes to bake a cake.

“For children who live in a home with a gas stove, the increased risk of asthma is on par with living in a home with a smoker,” she said.

So just as someone might want to quit smoking, there’s a strong case to be made for kicking the natural gas habit.

Happily, there is induction, which uses electromagnets to efficiently heat cookware without the inherent pollution of fossil fuels like natural gas.

Editors’ Picks

‘Minx’ Reveals That All Nudity Is Not Created Equal

She Discovered What Happened to 400 Dutch Jews Who Disappeared

Michelle Yeoh’s Quantum Leaps
While induction stoves may have far less lizard-brain appeal than gas, the latest models gain in unmatched power, precision and responsiveness. And, as anyone who routinely bubbles oatmeal onto the metal hob of a gas stove will be thrilled to read, cleaning the smooth cooktop of an induction range is an absolute breeze.

[Read Wirecutter’s picks for the best portable induction stovetops.]

There is, however, a learning curve. It took Mr. Osborne a few weeks to get comfortable wielding his beloved cast-iron pans on the new, suspiciously cool surface.

“I had to adapt to the mental process of looking at a number instead of a flame,” he said, referring to the stove’s digital display.

Eventually, induction’s speed, finesse and how it kept his kitchen cool won him over. His skillet chicken has never been better.

Although induction technology has been around for decades and is established in Europe, it has yet to catch on extensively here. According to Consumer Reports, induction cooktops and ranges are installed in only under 5 percent of homes in the United States.

This figure is likely to increase as New York and other cities across the country enact legislation limiting gas hookups in new construction. In luxury buildings, induction is not only seen as more efficient and functional than regular electric stoves — the kind with the red-hot circles that always smell like scorched milk — but it’s perceived as more upscale as well. And the New York City Housing Authority, or NYCHA, in partnership with WE ACT for Environmental Justice, has initiated a pilot program to install induction ranges in apartments to help NYCHA meet its city-mandated sustainability goals

But induction stoves are expensive. Starting around $1,000, they’re twice the price of a basic gas range. Still, industry experts agree that, as demand increases, prices will fall.

Rachelle Boucher, the owner of Kitchens to Life, a California consulting company that helps cooks electrify their kitchens, said that even as prices for induction stoves begin to come down, she’s seeing quality improve by leaps and bounds.

The newest wave of products, she said, incorporate nuanced technology that allows you to set and maintain precise temperatures — for example, the exact 180 degrees you’d need for a satiny crème anglaise without risk of curdling. Some cooktops will even let you move pans around different heat zones, mimicking a French top.

“The more people learn about the environmental costs of gas, the more they’re turning to induction,” Ms. Boucher said. “It’s the future, there’s no going back.”

Induction’s functionality and sustainability have won over a growing number of professional chefs, both at their restaurants and at home.
When Eric Ripert, the chef of Le Bernardin, renovated the kitchens of his Manhattan apartment and Hamptons beach house, he nixed the gas, instead choosing sleekly powerful induction cooktops by Miele and Gaggenau.

“After two days, I was in love,” Mr. Ripert said. “It’s so much more precise than watching a flame. You can really focus on your cooking and pay attention to what’s inside the pan, not what’s underneath it.”

He hasn’t yet converted his restaurant kitchens.

“It would be a big expense to replace stoves that still work well, but, if the gas stove broke, I’d consider it,” he said, adding that he thought his cooks would adapt quickly. “After a few days, they’d all love it.”

That is just what happened with the chef Justin Lee of Fat Choy in Manhattan, although he wasn’t expecting it.

When he opened the Chinatown restaurant in September 2020, there was no gas hookup.

“Most restaurants wouldn’t open without gas, but we couldn’t wait,” he said, “so we had to find our way with electric.”

It was a lot easier than he had anticipated, and he’s come to prefer induction for its consistency at high and low temperatures.

On the gentlest setting, he confits garlic and other ingredients for his XO sauce without having to watch it. “You can walk away, and it won’t ever burn,” he said.

And when the restaurant gets busy, he can crank the temperature

“For us, it’s a workhorse,” he said. “It can boil water in minutes, which, for cooking noodles, is significantly faster than gas.”

Mr. Lee discovered other advantages over the summer: His kitchen did not get as ferociously hot as it would have with a gas stove, and the absence of open flames also led to a decrease in burns.

Before writing this article, I spent time testing induction in my house, various friends’ kitchens and several showroom kitchens.

At home, I pulled the knobs off my gas stove and hid them in a drawer to discourage cheating. Then, I covered the hobs with metal sheet pans, arranged two portable induction burners on top of the pans, and vowed to give up the gas for at least two weeks.

The first order of business was figuring out which pieces of cookware were compatible with induction, then rearranging them so the viable ones were in easy reach. Only magnetic pans like cast-iron and stainless steel will work, which sidelined my beloved copper pans.

Then I got to cooking. I boiled huge pots of pasta water in minutes on the highest setting, and marveled at the speed. Then I slowly sautéed skillets of slivered garlic on low heat, never scorching them, no matter how long I got lost in my phone. With one burner on high and the other on low, I could make my favorite midnight pasta faster and more easily than on my gas stove.

Using a cast-iron pan and the highest setting, I achieved gorgeously rare lamb chops that were more evenly bronzed and crisp-edged than usual. Wiping up their splatter was the work of 20 seconds with a vinegar-soaked cloth, rather than the quarter-hour it would take to pull off the greasy hobs and scrub them in the sink.

In the mornings, my low-heat scrambled eggs were soft, custardy and never overcooked. And once I learned to set my oatmeal pots to simmer at exactly 209 degrees, they never came close to overboiling.
One thing that I did notice was the difference in the two burners. Although both worked similarly (and extremely well) at the highest and lowest settings, there was a huge difference in the middle. The high-end burner — an expensive Breville Control Freak I borrowed for testing — could be set to an exact temperature, like the 209 degrees I need for simmering my oatmeal. With the less-expensive burner (a Duxtop, Wirecutter’s top pick), I could only set temperature intervals of 20 degrees. At 200 degrees, my oatmeal didn’t even bubble. At 220 degrees, it boiled over. Luckily, cleaning it up was a cinch.

In my testing of both burners and ranges, I found that the thing I valued most was precision — that is, having as many temperature options as possible. I also greatly preferred chunky knobs to a touch screen: They were more intuitive, and easier to maneuver when my hands were dirty or wet.

As for the knobs from my gas stove, it’s been four weeks, and I still haven’t reattached them. I think they’re in that drawer, but, honestly, I haven’t checked. I haven’t missed the gas at all.

Good morning. Genevieve Ko is in The Times this week with a lovely dispatch from Dublin, where she traveled to get one of her daughters settled at college. There is no meal plan at the school, so her daughter will have to cook for herself. Genevieve scouted nearby shops with her, though, and came up with an ace recipe for her daughter to prepare: whiskey-glazed salmon with salt-crusted potatoes (above).

This fish is neither fried nor seared, which means it doesn’t give off the smoke and scent that puts so many off stovetop salmon — a real upside in her daughter’s ventless kitchen. Instead, it’s cooked in a simple sauce of whiskey, sugar and Worcestershire sauce that thickens rather than spatters, heating the fillet slowly from the bottom up and providing the fish with a savory sweetness while keeping it moist.

As for the potatoes, they’re made on the stovetop as well, boiled tender in salty water, then mostly drained and shaken in the pot over a flame until they’re dry and crackly with salt on the exterior, and creamy within.

That sounds like an excellent meal, far better than the Steak-umms and instant ramen that made up much of my collegiate diet, and one that I’d like to cook tonight. Won’t you join me?

Alternatively, you could take a look at this terrific recipe for rice cakes with peanut sauce and hoisin. As Hetty McKinnon, who developed the recipe for us, notes, rice cakes are beloved, wonderfully chewy and incredibly versatile: “They can be used as a filling substitute for short pasta, added to stews or quickly pan-fried with your favorite sauce,” she writes above the recipe. “Sold in Chinese or Korean markets, they come in tubes (like those used in tteokbokki) or sliced disks, and are packaged in vacuum-sealed packs or frozen, so they keep for ages.” (I like them especially in the cheese buldak the Korean cooking star Maangchi taught me to make.)

Or maybe pork chops with jammy-mustard glaze? Spaghetti al limone? Quick chicken and dumplings? Beef and broccoli? Salt and pepper shrimp rolls?

There are thousands and thousands of recipes to cook right now waiting for you on New York Times Cooking. (And further inspiration on our TikTok, Instagram and YouTube channels.) You do, yes, need a subscription to access them. Subscriptions are the gas in our stoves. They allow us to continue to do this work that we love. Thank you for yours. (If you haven’t subscribed yet, would you please consider doing so today? Thanks!)

We’ll be standing by to help, if anything goes wrong along the way. Just drop us a line: cookingcare@nytimes.com. Someone will get back to you. (You can also write to me: foodeditor@nytimes.com. I read every letter sent.)

Editors’ Picks

‘Minx’ Reveals That All Nudity Is Not Created Equal

She Discovered What Happened to 400 Dutch Jews Who Disappeared

Michelle Yeoh’s Quantum Leaps
Now, it’s nothing to do with gravlax or thumbprint cookies, but I’ve been enjoying the roller-coaster ride that is the thriller series “Pieces of Her,” on Netflix. But then again, I’d enjoy watching Toni Collette read Apple’s terms and conditions.

Charles E. Entenmann, the last of the family to run a storied Long Island bakery under their name, died last month at 92. Dan Barry, a child of Nassau County and a devoted Entenmann’s consumer practically since birth, wrote about the company’s place in the hearts of the people it served.

Also on Netflix, “Capitani,” a police procedural set in Luxembourg, which is maybe most notable for its language, a captivating mixture of Luxembourgish and French. (Also, it’s very pretty.)

Finally, see what you make of Jody Rosen’s exploration of “scam rap,” in The New York Times Magazine: “music by and of digital natives, a generation that has come of age on an internet swarming with dissemblers and con artists.” It’s fascinating! I’ll be back on Friday.
